Proceeding of the 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Information and Automation
Lijiang, China, August 2015

The Obstacle Detection and Obstacle Avoidance
Algorithm Based on 2-D Lidar
Yan Peng, Dong Qu , Yuxuan Zhong,
Shaorong Xie, Jun Luo

Jason Gu

Department of Mechatronic Engineering
Shanghai University, Shanghai, China

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3J2X4 Canada

qu_0821@163.com

Jason.gu@dal.ca
visible graph method, they all have the advantages of a simple
mathematical model and good real-time performance. The
theory of artificial potential field (APF) was proposed by
Khatib, he defined the influence of the target on the robot as
virtual attractive force, and the influence of obstacles on the
robot as virtual repulsive force, the direction of the resultant
force is also the direction of the next movement of the robot
[6]. The traditional artificial potential field method has some
problems, such as local optimal solution, and target
inaccessible when robot is near to the target. There are some
improved artificial potential field methods combined with the
fuzzy rules [7], genetic algorithm [8], and regression search
method [10] respectively. The visual graph method can be
used to judge if the line between the robot and the target cross
the obstacle, no cross represents the target is visible, the robot
can reach the target point directly, Otherwise, choose one of
the connecting line from the robot to the ends of obstacle as
the direction of traffic [12][14].
This paper proposed a simple and practical obstacle
detection method based on the 2-D lidar LMS511 from SICK
SENSOR, and also designed an obstacle avoidance algorithm
in the light of the results of the obstacle detection, which is
based on visibility graph method, and the validity of the
algorithm is verified on the MATLAB simulation platform.

Abstract - Obstacle avoidance ability is the significant
embodiment of the ground mobile robot, and the basic guarantee
of the ground mobile robot to perform various tasks. Obstacle
avoidance technologies are divided into two kinds, one is based
on the global map and another is based on sensors respectively.
This paper mainly aims at the local obstacle avoidance method
based on sensors. The study of obstacle detection and obstacle
avoidance are two inseparable parts in the research of obstacle
avoidance ability. This paper proposes an efficient obstacle
detection and obstacle avoidance algorithm based on 2-D lidar. A
method is proposed to get the information of obstacles by
filtering and clustering the laser-point cloud data. Also, this
method generates the forward angle and velocity of robot based
on the principle of minimum cost function. The obstacle detection
and obstacle avoidance algorithm has advantages of a simple
mathematical model and good real-time performance. The
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm is verified on MATLAB
simulation platform.
Index Terms – 2-D lidar; obstacle detection; obstacle
clustering; obstacle avoidance

I. INTRODUCTION
Obstacle avoidance technology is a hotspot in the field of
the ground mobile robot, also is one of the most important
embodiment of the intelligent robot. Good performance of
obstacle avoidance is the basic premise of robot on a particular
task.
The technology of obstacle avoidance can be divided into
two parts, one is global obstacle avoidance method based on
the known environment information and another is local
obstacle avoidance method based on the information from
sensors. This paper is mainly focused on the local obstacle
avoidance method based on the information from 2-D lidar.
Lidar has the advantages of high precision, large detection
range, and fast sweep frequency. It is widely used in the
obstacle detection field of the ground mobile robot [1]. Lidar
can be divided into 2D lidar and 3D lidar. 3D lidar can get the
height information of obstacles, so it is suitable for bumpy
environment, such as the sea, field, etc. But its data is large
which costs more processing time, meanwhile the price of 3-D
lidar is higher than 2-D lidar [2-4]. This paper is focuses on
the 2-D lidar for its low price and more fast processing time.
The most commonly used local obstacle avoidance
method is the artificial potential field method (APF) and

978-1-4673-9104-7/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

II. 2-D LIDAR
LMS511 is a two dimensional lidar of SICK
SENSOR used in field (Fig. 1), measuring range up to
80 meters. Its horizontal scan range from -5° to +185°,
angle resolution is set to 1°, once scan can get 191 laser
points, also called laser-point cloud (Fig. 2). Assume
that the distance of the laser point I is Ri, The position of
this laser point in Rectangular coordinate system with
the origin of lidar can be obtained as (Xi, Yi):
Xi = Ri * cos(i - 5)
Yi = Ri * sin(i - 5)

(1)

i ∈ (0,190)

Since the lidar is in single plane scanning,
considering the lidar is installed on the ground mobile

1648

Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on June 28,2021 at 16:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

robot may encounter low obstacles. Install the lidar in a
slightly downward sloping way when use it, set the
sloping angle as a (Fig.3). Therefore, the distance value
need to be revised, the revised point coordinates of laser
can be expressed as following:

Xi = Ri * cos(i - 5)* cos(a)
Yi = Ri * sin(i - 5)* cos(a)

(2)

i ∈ (0,190)

Fig.4 Obstacle detection algorithm process

Obstacle detection process is mainly divided into three
steps: the filter, preprocess, and obstacle clustering.

Fig. 1 SICK LMS511

A. Median filtering
Using a 3*3 median filtering window at the laser-point
cloud data, set the current time as t, and the value of laser
point i is R(t, i), Then build the 3*3 median filtering window
shown as following:

[ R(t - 1,i - 1), R(t - 1,i), R(t - 1,i + 1)
R(t,i - 1), R(t,i), R(t,i + 1)
R(t + 1,i - 1), R(t + 1,i), R(t + 1,i + 1)]
Take the median of the 9 numbers as the value of the
distance between robot and the laser point i at the time t, this
method can give attention to both space and time, filtering out
the occasional noise points, reducing the complexity of the
obstacle clustering.

Fig. 2 Origin data of lidar.

Fig.3 Lidar downward sloping angle a

III. OBSTACLE DETECTION ALGORITHM
Combined with the characteristics of laser-point cloud
data, this paper proposed an obstacle detection algorithm and
its process is shown in Figure 4:
Fig.5 Effect of Median filtering

1649
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on June 28,2021 at 16:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Preprocessing of laser-point cloud data
The progresses in preprocessing the laser-point cloud data
is expressed as follows:
(i) In space order, for segmentation of the 1*381 laser-point
cloud sequence, set i as the index value of those 381 laser
points, R(i) is the distance value of the laser point i, so the
starting index and the termination index of each block of
independent laser-point cloud blocks are start(i) and stop(i)
respectively, among which start(i) satisfies
( R(i -1) == 0) & &( R(i)! = 0)

i ∈ [1, num ] , the calculation method of R(i) can be expressed

as following:
R(i) = R(p)+ i *

(3)

(4)

(ii) Assuming the 381 laser points are divided into N blocks at
the step (i), splitting each of the laser-point cloud blocks, the
conditions for separation is when the distance between point i
assumed to be (x(i),y(i)) and point i+1 assumed to be
(x(i+1),y(i+1)) is greater than the value of the width of the
robot multiply the amplification factor k.
2
2
d = [x(i) - x(i + 1)] + [y(i) - y(i + 1)]

num

(6)

C. Obstacle clustering
Assuming after filter and preprocess of the 381 laser
points, the laser-point cloud is divided into N independent
laser-point cloud blocks, clustering each block of laser points,
i ∈ (0, N) , set the starting point index value and termination
point index value of block i are p and q respectively.
Clustering methods can be divided into three types: circular,
linear and rectangle. The judgment condition is expressed as
following:
(i) If the amount of laser points in a laser-point cloud block is
x, and x is less than 5, the clustering method is circular, get the
intermediate point O(Xo,Yo) between starting laser point p and
termination laser point q as the center of a circle, Dj is
distance between those x laser points and point O,
j ∈ [ p, q ] ,chose the maximum of Dj as the radius of the
circle. As shown in the figure 6.

In the same way, stop(i) satisfies
( R(i )! = 0) & &( R(i + 1) == 0)

R(q) - R(p)

(5)

Xo =

If distance d satisfies the condition: d > k * Width , where
Width means the width of the robot. Then break the current
laser-point cloud block into two pieces, and the amount of
laser-point cloud block plus one time.

Yo =

Xp + Xq
2
Yp + Yq
2

(7)

r = max(Dj)
j ∈ [ p,q ]

Fig.5 Segment and merge

(iii) If there are N laser-point cloud blocks, the value of L is
the space distance between the termination point of laser-point
cloud block i (set its index value as p in the 381 laser points)
and the starting point of laser-point cloud block i+1 (set its
index value as q in the 381 laser points). If the value of L
satisfies the condition: L < Width , which means the robot
cannot pass this narrow gap, so consider them to be merged
into one laser-point cloud block, the calculation just like step
(ii). Finally, the total number of laser-point cloud block minus
one time. To make the two combined laser-point cloud blocks
spatially continuous, we need to give value to those laser
points cloud between p and q, assuming that there are num
laser points required the assignment, and the distance value of
point p is R(p), the distance value of point q is R(q), so

Fig.6 Circular clustering

(ii) If x is greater than 5, set the line L: y=ax+b which
connecting the starting point p and the termination point q as
the benchmark, calculate distances between the line L and
each point between point p and point q, get the maximum
value as Dmax, |s| is the distance between point p and point q,
if Dmax < 0.2* S ,the clustering method is linear, returns the
information of two endpoints which named Point1 and Point2.
(iii) If Dmax ≥ 0.2* S , the clustering method is rectangle,
returns the rectangle’s four endpoints which named Point1,
Point2, Point3 and Point4. In practice, this method can be
treated as 4 lines. As shown in Figure 7.

1650
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on June 28,2021 at 16:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

range of lidar to be 60 meters, all of the linear obstacle and
circular obstacle are in the detection range of lidar, so robot
chosed the right side of the circular obstacle as the optimal
traveling direction. As shown in Figure 9.
According to contrast turning angle generated by Fig. 8
and Fig. 9, we found that the turning angle in Fig. 9 is more
reasonable because robot could get more environment
information with laser range set to be 60 meters.
Fig.7 Linear and rectangle clustering

IV. OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE ALGORITHM
Set the robot’s current traveling direction angle to be θ ,
the termination point is destination, when there is no obstacles,
the optimum direction is from robot to the Destination, set as
α ,we get

y - yr
α = actan( D
)
xD - xr

(8)

Among which (x D , y D ) is the terminal point coordinate,
(xr , y r ) is the current coordinate of the robot. At this point
the robot’s next steering angle is α - θ .
When obstacles are detected in the process of moving, and
if they are without prejudice to the robot’s steering angle
which make the robot reach the terminal point from the
current position, the steering angle remains: α - θ .
In the process of moving, if robot will collide with an
obstacle in the direction of α , we need to search for a turning
angle β i at the both sides of angle α which can help the robot

Fig.8 The selection of the optimum direction

avoid obstacles. To speed up the search speed, take 1° as the
interval, ie

βi = α + i
i ∈ [-90,90 ]

(9)

In all feasible directions, construct a cost function as
following:

β = min{ βi - α }

Fig.9 The selection of the optimum direction after
increasing lidar’s detection range

(10)

Simultaneously, the speed control of robot is also
designed in consideration of running safety. Assuming that
is the safe distance, and Ldanger is the dangerous
L

So the turning angle which can help the robot avoid
obstacles is α +β . As shown in the Figure 8 and Figure 9.
The difference between Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 is the laser
range, for it adopt 50 meters laser range in Fig. 8 compared
with it adopt 60 meters laser range in Fig. 9.
Set the laser range to be 50 meters, there are a linear
obstacle in the left front of the robot and a circular obstacle in
the right front. Only the right part of the linear obstacle is
beyond the detection range of lidar, so the robot chose a
direction as shown in Figure 8. When increasing detection

safe

distance, so the speed control rate can be expressed as
following:
⎧Vmax
Dist >= Lsafe
⎪
(11)
Dist - Ldanger
⎪
V = ⎨(0.2 +
* 0.8)* Vmax , Ldanger <= Dist < Lsafe
Lsafe - Ldanger
⎪
Dist < Ldangeer
⎪0.2* V
max
⎩

1651
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on June 28,2021 at 16:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. SIMULATION TEST

It can be seen from the Figure 12, the obstacle detection
algorithm proposed in this paper could filter and split the
laser-point cloud data quickly and effectively, and cluster the
laser points into linear obstacles and circular obstacles.
Meanwhile, some simulation tests were carried out on
MATLAB simulation platform about the robot’s obstacle
avoidance algorithm. Simulation scenario is an area of 100m *
100m, (0, 0) is the starting point, (100, 100) is the termination
point. Setting detection range of lidar to be 50m and 80m
respectively, a series of circular and linear obstacles were set
up in those tests, and the results of those tests with the obstacle
avoidance algorithm proposed in this paper shown is shown in
Figure 13:

In order to verify the effectiveness of the above-described
obstacle detection and avoidance algorithms, some robotic
obstacle detection tests are conducted. The test field is shown
in Figure 10.

Fig.10 The test scenarios

It contains bushes, walls and wooden boxes in the test
scene. The laser-point cloud data obtained by lidar was shown
in Figure 11.
(a)

Fig.11 The laser-point cloud data of lidar

Import the collected raw data into the obstacle detection
algorithm, obstacle information after extraction was shown in
Figure 12.

(b)
Fig.13 The obstacle avoidance tests in complex environment
(a) lidar’s detection range is 50m (b) lidar’s detection range is 80m

It can be seen that the greater the detection range of lidar
was, the more the environmental information could be got, and
the better the obstacle avoidance path was.
In obstacle avoidance process, when the obstacles are
located after the target, destination unreachable problem is
arisen, the reason is when the robot approaches to the target,
some obstacles after the target are detected, then robot makes
an evasive action, so it can’t reach to the target directly, as
shown in Figure 14. The solution is setting a circular area, of
which the center is the target point, and r is the radius. When
moving into this area, the robot begins to estimate whether the
obstacle on the path blocks robot and target point. If there is

Fig.12 The obstacle information after extraction

1652
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on June 28,2021 at 16:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[4] J. Han, D. Kim, M. Lee, and M. Sunwoo, "Enhanced road boundary and
obstacle detection using a downward-looking LIDAR sensor," Vehicular
Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 61, pp. 971-985, 2012.
[5] C. Yu and D. Zhang, "Obstacle detection based on a four-layer laser
radar," in Robotics and Biomimetics, 2007. ROBIO 2007. IEEE
International Conference on, 2007, pp. 218-221.
[6] O. Khatib, "Real-time obstacle avoidance for manipulators and mobile
robots," The international journal of robotics research, vol. 5, pp. 90-98,
1986.
[7] S. Ishaq and S. K. Shivam, "AUTONOMOUS MOBILE ROBOT
DYNAMIC MOTION PLANNING USING HYBRID FUZZY
POTENTIAL FIELD."
[8] Y. Cen, L. Wang, and H. Zhang, "Real-time obstacle avoidance strategy
for mobile robot based on improved coordinating potential field with
genetic algorithm," in Control Applications, 2007. CCA 2007. IEEE
International Conference on, 2007, pp. 415-419.
[9] J. Sfeir, M. Saad, and H. Saliah-Hassane, "An improved artificial
potential field approach to real-time mobile robot path planning in an
unknown environment," in Robotic and Sensors Environments (ROSE),
2011 IEEE International Symposium on, 2011, pp. 208-213.
[10] G. Li, A. Yamashita, H. Asama, and Y. Tamura, "An efficient improved
artificial potential field based regression search method for robot path
planning," in Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA), 2012 International
Conference on, 2012, pp. 1227-1232.
[11] J. Han, D. Kim, M. Lee, and M. Sunwoo, "Enhanced road boundary and
obstacle detection using a downward-looking LIDAR sensor," Vehicular
Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 61, pp. 971-985, 2012.
[12]D. An and H. Wang, "VPH: a new laser radar based obstacle avoidance
method for intelligent mobile robots," in Intelligent Control and
Automation, 2004. WCICA 2004. Fifth World Congress on, 2004, pp.
4681-4685.
[13]B. You, J. Qiu, and D. Li, "A novel obstacle avoidance method for lowcost household mobile robot," in Automation and Logistics, 2008. ICAL
2008. IEEE International Conference on, 2008, pp. 111-116. V.J.
Lumelsky and A.A. Stepanov, “Path-planning strategies for a point
mobile automaton moving amidst obstacles of arbitrary shape,”
Algorithmica, vol. 2, pp. 403-430, 1987.
[14]D. Jie, M. Xueming, and P. Kaixiang, "IVFH : Real-time dynamic
obstacle avoidance for mobile robots," in Control Automation Robotics &
Vision (ICARCV), 2010 11th International Conference on, 2010, pp. 844847.

no obstacle across the path, the robot could reach to the target
directly. Or the robot will apply the avoidance strategy to
avoid obstacles, as shown in Figure 15.

Fig.14 Destination unreachable problem

Fig.15 The solution of destination unreachable problem

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the obstacle detection method based on
SICK LMS511 outdoor lidar can effectively filter the noise
from raw laser data, segment and cluster the laser-point cloud
by means of filtering, preprocessing and clustering. The test
result acquired from an outdoor environment show that the
obstacle information can be obtained by using this method.
Meanwhile, this paper proposed a simple obstacle avoidance
method based on visibility graph method with a MATLAB
simulation platform which proved its effectiveness in a
complex scene. Future job will focus on dealing with dynamic
obstacles with 2-D lidar.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Ye and J. Borenstein, "Characterization of a 2-D laser scanner for
mobile robot obstacle negotiation," in ICRA, 2002, pp. 2512-2518.
[2] M. Takahashi, K. Kobayashi, K. Watanabe, and T. Kinoshita,
"Development of prediction based emergency obstacle avoidance module
by using LIDAR for mobile robot," in Soft Computing and Intelligent
Systems (SCIS), 2014 Joint 7th International Conference on and
Advanced Intelligent Systems (ISIS), 15th International Symposium on,
2014, pp. 561-564.
[3] F. Fayad and V. Cherfaoui, "Tracking objects using a laser scanner in
driving situation based on modeling target shape," in Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium, 2007 IEEE, 2007, pp. 44-49.

1653
Authorized licensed use limited to: Dalhousie University. Downloaded on June 28,2021 at 16:58:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

